docs(examples/opentelemetry): use modern components and simplify (#33226)
renovatebot/renovate: docs/usage/examples/opentelemetry.md

Create a `docker-compose.yaml` and `otel-collector-config.yml` file as seen below in a folder.

```yaml title="docker-compose.yaml"
name: renovate-otel-demo

services:
  # Jaeger for storing traces
  jaeger:
    image: jaegertracing/jaeger:2.1.0
    ports:
      - '16686:16686' # Web UI

>       - '4317' # OTLP GRPC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - '4317' # OTLP gRPC
```

I think the official abbreviation is with a small case `g`.

      - '4318' # OTLP HTTP

  # Prometheus for storing metrics
  prometheus:
    image: prom/prometheus:v3.0.1
    ports:
      - '9090:9090' # Web UI
      - '4318' # OTLP HTTP
    command:
      - --web.enable-otlp-receiver

>       # We have to read these flags from the Dockerfile as `command` is overwriting the default flags

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      # Read these flags from the Dockerfile, because `command` overwrites the default flags.
```

      # https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/5b5fee08af4c73230b2dae35964816f7b3c29351/Dockerfile#L23-L24
      - --config.file=/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
      - --storage.tsdb.path=/prometheus

  otel-collector:

>     # Using the Contrib version to get access to the spanmetrics connector

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Using the Contrib version to access the spanmetrics connector.
```

    # If you don't need the spanmetrics connector, you can use the standard version
    image: otel/opentelemetry-collector-contrib:0.116.1
    volumes:
      - ./otel-collector-config.yml:/etc/otelcol-contrib/config.yaml
    ports:
      - '4318:4318' # OTLP HTTP ( exposed to the host )

>       - '4317:4317' # OTLP GRPC ( exposed to the host )

Author: ```suggestion
      - '4317:4317' # OTLP gRPC ( exposed to the host )
```

    depends_on:
      - jaeger
      - prometheus
```

```yaml title="otel-collector-config.yml"
receivers:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc:
        endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4317
      http:
        endpoint: 0.0.0.0:4318

exporters:
  otlp/jaeger:
    endpoint: jaeger:4317
    tls:
      insecure: true
  otlphttp/prometheus:
    endpoint: http://prometheus:9090/api/v1/otlp
  debug:

>   # verbosity: normal

Reviewer: The `verbosity: normal` bit is commented out. Is that intended?

Author: These commented out options are for users, if they run into problems. 
They would be to verbose for normal usage.

  pipelines:
    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]
      exporters:
        - otlp/jaeger
        # Send traces to connector for metrics calculation
        - spanmetrics
        # Enable debug exporter to see traces in the logs

>         #- debug

Reviewer: Here's another commented out bit: `- debug`.

Author: For user debugging

      processors: [batch]

    metrics:
      receivers:

>         - otlp # allow to receive metrics directly from Renovate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - otlp # Receive metrics from Renovate.
```

>         - spanmetrics # allow receiving metrics calculated internally by the spanmetrics connector

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - spanmetrics # Receive metrics calculated by the spanmetrics connector.
```

      processors: [batch]
      exporters:
        - otlphttp/prometheus
        # Enable debug exporter to see metrics in the logs

>         # - debug

Reviewer: The `- debug` bit is commented out here again.

Author: For user debugging

docker-compose up
```

> This command will start an [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib), an instance of [Jaeger for traces](https://www.jaegertracing.io/) as well Prometh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command will start:

- an [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib)
- an instance of [Jaeger for traces](https://www.jaegertracing.io/)
- and Prometheus
```

Let's put the items in a list.

Please check me on the last line! I think you meant `Prometheus` instead of `Prometh`?

traces_span_metrics_duration_milliseconds_bucket{http_method="GET", job="renovatebot.com/renovate", le="10000", service_name="renovate", span_kind="SPAN_KIND_INTERNAL", span_name="repository", status_code="STATUS_CODE_UNSET"} 1
traces_span_metrics_duration_milliseconds_bucket{http_method="GET", job="renovatebot.com/renovate", le="+Inf", service_name="renovate", span_kind="SPAN_KIND_INTERNAL", span_name="repository", status_code="STATUS_CODE_UNSET"} 1

traces_span_metrics_duration_milliseconds_sum{http_method="GET", job="renovatebot.com/renovate", service_name="renovate", span_kind="SPAN_KIND_INTERNAL", span_name="repository", status_code="STATUS_CODE_UNSET"} 4190.694209
traces_span_metrics_duration_milliseconds_count{http_method="GET", job="renovatebot.com/renovate", service_name="renovate", span_kind="SPAN_KIND_INTERNAL", span_name="repository", status_code="STATUS_CODE_UNSET"} 1
```

The [spanmetrics connector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/connector/spanmetricsconnector) creates two sets of metrics.

#### Calls metric

> At first there are the `traces_span_metrics_calls_total` metrics which display how often specific trace spans have been observed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At first there are the `traces_span_metrics_calls_total` metrics.
This metric shows how often _specific_ trace spans have been observed.
```

Let's split the long sentence into two smaller sentences.

I think the key bit in the second sentence is the _specific_ trace span bit?

Author: Shouldn't be the next sentence also using the plural?
```suggestion
At first there are the `traces_span_metrics_calls_total` metrics.
These metrics show how often _specific_ trace spans have been observed.
```

Reviewer: Good catch!

For example:

> `traces_span_metrics_calls_total{http_method="GET", job="renovatebot.com/renovate", service_name="renovate", span_kind="SPAN_KIND_INTERNAL", span_name="repositories", status_code="STATUS_CODE_UNSET"} 2` signals that 2 repositories have been renovated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- `traces_span_metrics_calls_total{http_method="GET", job="renovatebot.com/renovate", service_name="renovate", span_kind="SPAN_KIND_INTERNAL", span_name="repositories", status_code="STATUS_CODE_UNSET"} 2` signals that 2 repositories have been renovated.
```

Let's make a proper list of the two examples.

> `traces_span_metrics_calls_total{http_method="GET", job="renovatebot.com/renovate", service_name="renovate", span_kind="SPAN_KIND_INTERNAL", span_name="run", status_code="STATUS_CODE_UNSET"} 1` represents how often Renovate has been run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `traces_span_metrics_calls_total{http_method="GET", job="renovatebot.com/renovate", service_name="renovate", span_kind="SPAN_KIND_INTERNAL", span_name="run", status_code="STATUS_CODE_UNSET"} 1` represents how often Renovate has been run.
```

If we combine this using the PrometheusQueryLanguage ( PromQL ), we can calculate the average count of repositories each Renovate run handles.

```
traces_span_metrics_calls_total{span_name="repository",service_name="renovate"} / traces_span_metrics_calls_total{span_name="run",service_name="renovate"}
```

> This metrics arge generated for http call spans too:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These metrics are generated for HTTP call spans too:
```

```yaml
traces_span_metrics_calls_total{http_host="prometheus-community.github.io:443", http_method="GET", http_status_code="200", job="renovatebot.com/renovate", service_name="renovate", span_kind="SPAN_KIND_CLIENT", span_name="GET", status_code="STATUS_CODE_UNSET"} 5
```

#### Latency buckets

> The second class of metrics exposed are the latency-focused buckets that allow creating [heatmaps](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/basics/intro-histograms/#heatmaps).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second class of metrics exposed are the latency-focused buckets, that allow creating [heatmaps](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/basics/intro-histograms/#heatmaps).
```
